JUDY WOODRUFF: We return to our
series Inside Putin's Russia
-- tonight, the fate of some
of the Kremlin's opponents.
According to one study, in the
past three years, 38 prominent
Russians have been murdered
or died suspiciously.
The high mortality rate
among some Russian critics
has a long history.
But critics say it is emblematic
of how President Vladimir
Putin runs today's Russia.
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin and producer Zach
Fannin report from Moscow.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In today's
Russia, there are consequences
to criticizing the state.
Police tell protesters their
rally isn't sanctioned.
They are asking President
Vladimir Putin not to
run for reelection.
This demonstration is
sponsored by the opposition
group Open Russia.
In Saint Petersburg, and across
the country, police arrested
more than 100 protesters.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA, Open
Russia: These democratic
opposition activists
are being arrested and
given lengthy prison sentences.
It is members of the democratic
opposition who are being
forced into exile, or harassed,
or attacked, or murdered.
NICK SCHIFRIN:
Thirty-five--year-old
Vladimir Kara-Murza is Open
Russia's vice chairman.
He is an outspoken activist,
demonstrating against Putin
and organizing protests.
We first sat down with
him late last year.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: We
believe in the rule of law.
We believe in human rights.
We believe that Russia
should enjoy the same
democratic institutions
that the rest of Europe
enjoys.
NICK SCHIFRIN: To try and create
those democratic institutions,
he teamed up with the man he
calls his mentor, Boris Nemtsov,
a former deputy prime minister
who became the country's
leading dissident.
The two traveled to Washington
to highlight the mysterious
death of Sergei Magnitsky,
a lawyer who exposed corruption
among senior officials.
Nemtsov and Kara-Murza
convinced the U.S. Congress to
freeze the assets of Russians
believed connected
to Magnitsky's death.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA:
These people in the
current Russian regime who
rule like to keep their
money, their assets in the West.
They want to
vacation in the West.
They send their kids
to schools to the West.
And this personal accountability
may well be the only thing
that will make them think
twice.
NICK SCHIFRIN: A little more
than two years later, Nemtsov
was assassinated a few hundred
feet from the Kremlin's walls.
His death was
brazen and shocking.
This is the spot where
Boris Nemtsov was killed.
And you can see the corner of
the Kremlin, right there, just
a few hundreds yards away,
and you can see the memorial
for him that's on this bridge.
Today in Moscow, a court
sentenced five people
in Nemtsov's murder.
Whether or not they were the
masterminds, they permanently
silenced Nemtsov's outspoken
criticism.
Kara-Murza believes someone
used poison to silence him too.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: And I
started suddenly feeling really,
really sick, and within a
space of 15 to 20 minutes, I
went from feeling completely
normal, like I am now, to having
a really rapid heart rate,
sweating, palpitation.
I started vomiting, and then
I just lost consciousness.
Kidneys, I think went first.
Then it was the heart,
the lungs, the stomach,
the liver, everything.
Everything just shut down.
So I have no doubt that
this was a deliberate
attempt to murder, based
on my political activities,
motivated by my activities
in the Russian opposition.
NICK SCHIFRIN: There are
people who are working as
opposition who are not targeted.
What is the line that
you apparently crossed?
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: There's
the clear line between just
saying things that are against
the regime, and it's a totally
different thing to go after
their own personal interests,
after their pockets.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The history of
assassination goes back decades.
In 1940, Leon Trotsky was
killed with an ice axe.
In 2006, crusading
Russian journalist Anna
Politkovskaya was murdered.
And in 2014, Alexander
Litvinenko, a former
intelligence agent who
accused Putin of ordering
Politkovskaya's death, was
killed by radioactive tea.
Denis Voronenkov was a pro-Putin
lawmaker who defected to
Ukraine and became a Putin
critic.
In March, he was walking down
the street in Kiev when a
gunman shot him three times.
His body bled out on
the sidewalk in the
middle of the day.
Maria Maksakova is his widow.
MARIA MAKSAKOVA, Widow of Denis
Voronenkov: I was dreaming
about my first spring in Kiev
with Denis.
I was dreaming so desperately.
At first, I thought it's better
not to be born at all when
you lose something like that.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Maksakova
lives in Kiev, where she
is raising their son.
In Moscow, she and Voronenkov
were both lawmakers
allied with Putin, and
they enjoyed the spoils
that come from power.
But he'd also been an
investigator who uncovered
corruption in the Russian
intelligence agency,
the FSB.
Who do you think
killed your husband?
MARIA MAKSAKOVA: He
had certain enemies.
And these enemies
are in the FSB.
The anti-corruption teams that
he would investigate from here,
that is loss of money and loss
of influence, loss of
everything, positions.
And that was something that
they would not let him do.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russia calls
her claim a fabrication.
But his death fits a pattern.
A once-loyal family member
becomes an outspoken
opponent and ends up dead.
MASHA GESSEN, Author/Activist:
A mafia family, you can be born
into, you can be adopted into
it.
You can't leave it voluntarily.
People who have tried to leave
the Putin family voluntarily
have not fared very well.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Masha Gessen is a
Russian journalist, author, and
prolific anti-Putin activist.
You have been dubbed by
some an enemy of the state.
Are you an enemy of the state?
MASHA GESSEN: Well, I
am certainly an enemy
of the mafia state.
Absolutely, yes.
I'm not an enemy of
the Russian state.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Gessen
was the first journalist
blacklisted by Putin's Kremlin.
She's also been targeted
because she's a lesbian who's
raising adopted children.
WOMAN (through translator):
He was born by a woman I don't
know and first met when he
was 2.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In 2013,
she helped lead a video
campaign criticizing
an anti-gay propaganda
law.
It helped condone homophobia
and attacks on gay Russians, and
Gessen argues the law explains
how Putin rules.
MASHA GESSEN: The autocrat
needs everybody out in the
street with flags aloft.
That is primarily the
need for mobilization.
To have mobilization,
you need to have enemies.
You can have LGBT people as
enemies today, and then you
can have Americans tomorrow,
and keep the LGBT people in
your back pocket and then pull
them out when you need them
again.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And Gessen says
above it all is a boss served
by loyal lieutenants, who
don't need explicit
instructions to launch attacks.
MASHA GESSEN: The patriarch
of the family will say, do I
always have to tell you what
to do?
Like, don't you know what
the right thing to do is?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Does the Kremlin
kill its political enemies?
SERGEY MARKOV, Russian
National Strategic Council:
One hundred percent sure not.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The Kremlin
declined our interview request.
But Sergey Markov, a
member of Putin's party
and Russia's National
Strategic Council, reflects
the Kremlin's defense,
counterpunch and embrace
conspiracy theories, starting
with the assassinated
opposition leader Boris Nemtsov.
SERGEY MARKOV: Who
organized his killing?
I strongly believe that it's
terrorist organization SBU,
intelligence service of Ukraine.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Ukraine
killed Boris Nemtsov?
SERGEY MARKOV: Not Ukraine.
Ukraine is country run by
terrorists, but terrorists who
captured Ukraine, they killed
Boris Nemtsov.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But
it's more than Nemtsov.
Right?
Vladimir Kara-Murza has
been poisoned twice.
Anna Politkovskaya was killed.
There are a lot of people
who have criticized the
Kremlin who end up dead.
SERGEY MARKOV: First
of all, not too much.
This atmosphere of
killing people exists,
but this atmosphere
had been created not by
Vladimir Putin, but by Western
countries against Russia.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the people
Putin targets, that argument
is an attempt to distract.
MIKHAIL KASYANOV, Former
Russian Prime Minister:
Russia surrounded by enemies.
We should support even
stronger than before our
leader, et cetera, et cetera.
This is standard propaganda
for any authoritarian regime.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Mikhail
Kasyanov was Putin's
first prime minister.
In the early 2000s, the two
worked together to pass much
needed economic reforms.
In 2004, Putin fired him, and
Kasyanov became an outspoken
opposition politician, appearing
alongside Boris Nemtsov
and Vladimir Kara-Murza.
Last year, a prominent Putin
ally posted a video of him
and Kara-Murza in crosshairs.
But not all of the Kremlin's
enemies end up dead.
Some end up humiliated.
How did they target you?
MIKHAIL KASYANOV: On television.
They're blackmailing me and
just creating dirty stories,
et cetera, et cetera.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Five
months before 2015
elections, state television
broadcast Kasyanov having
sex with his assistant.
The video helped
fracture his party.
MIKHAIL KASYANOV: They will
try to destroy publicly, to
destroy morally and reputation
of all of us.
And they're doing this
quite successfully.
And they will
continue doing this.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And
is there anything you
can do to stop them?
MIKHAIL KASYANOV: We
cannot do anything because
we have no protection.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: We have
no free and fair elections.
We have censorship in the media.
We have political prisoners,
more than 100 political
prisoners now in Russia, today.
NICK SCHIFRIN: One year after
he nearly died from poisoning,
Kara-Murza got better, and
restarted his work.
In February, he was a few
hours away from boarding a
plane to Washington, where his
family lives for their
safety, when he says he
was poisoned a second time.
We sat down with him and
his wife, Evgenia, in march.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA:
And I couldn't breathe.
And at this stage, when you
are lying there, trying to gasp
for air, you know, I felt just
life slowly going out
of the whole body.
And I remember that distinct
feeling that, this is it.
This is the end.
Now I'm going to die.
The only thing I was able to
do, I called my wife, Evgenia,
who was here in the United
States.
EVGENIA KARA-MURZA, Wife
of Vladimir Kara-Murza:
I asked them to take
him to the hospital,
to the same medical team
that had treated him in 2015.
Had he been on the plane, had
he been alone in his apartment,
had he been somewhere with
- - I don't know, in the streets
of Moscow - - oh, my God.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Kara-Murza
had noticed that, almost
every night, Moscow
city workers removed
Boris Nemtsov's memorial.
So he made a film to protect
his mentor's career and life.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: That
film was the most difficult
thing I ever did in my life.
The film is about the portrait
of a man who could, if not
for a quirk of fate, very well
become the president of Russia.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Do you miss him?
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: There
are no words to describe
how much I miss him.
Sorry.
EVGENIA KARA-MURZA: The risks,
they do hit close to home,
closer and closer every time.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Have you ever
asked him not to go back?
EVGENIA KARA-MURZA:
It is terrifying.
I'm not going to lie to you.
But I want him to continue to
do what he thinks is important,
what he thinks is right.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And her
faith allows Kara-Murza
to keep his faith that
he can change the system.
He says, after recovering, he
will go back to Russia to finish
the work that he and Nemtsov
started.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Moscow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And our week-long
series Inside Putin's Russia
continues tomorrow with a look
at the relationship between
Russia and the United States.